GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: the
mother and
father of a fallen soldier at
the heart of
a political firestorm.
John McCain joins a chorus of
Republicans
condemning Donald Trump's
attacks on the Muslim
American parents of a U.S. Army
captain killed
in Iraq.
We talk with the Khans.
KHIZR KHAN, Father of Killed
U.S. Soldier:
Him and I have same equal
rights.
In his eyes, he thinks that he
can criticize
people, but no one else can
criticize.
That is not the value of this
country.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Monday, we are
off to the races.
Our Politics Monday team gets
you up to speed
as the campaign officially
shifts to the general
election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, China's
demographic fault
lines.
What the one-child policy really
means for
the future of the population.
HOWARD FRENCH, "The Atlantic":
China, the
world's most populous country,
1.3, 1.4 billion
people, will in the next decade
or so have
to begin looking for people
outside of China.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Three months to go
in the presidential
campaign, and for a third
straight day, the
headline is Donald Trump's feud
with the family
of a soldier killed in Iraq.
The Republican presidential
nominee took heat
today from his own party, but he
showed no
sign of relenting.
We will have the story in full
right after
the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Warnings about
the Zika virus
are intensifying in South
Florida.
Officials now say 14 cases were
likely transmitted
locally by mosquitoes, all
within a neighborhood
north of downtown Miami.
The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
today issued a new warning to
pregnant women
to avoid that area.
GWEN IFILL: Main Street in
Ellicott City,
Maryland, is a muddy shambles
after a flash
flood that killed two people
Saturday night.
It was triggered by a cloudburst
of more than
six inches of rain.
Cell phone video captured people
linking up
to reach a woman in a car that
was being carried
away.
Today, officials praised the
rescuers.
ALLAN KITTLEMAN, Executive,
Howard County,
Maryland: That human chain has
gone around
the world five or six times
already.
But people know that whatever
people in a
community would do that for
their neighbors
or even for strangers, they will
not let this
storm defeat us.
We are going to make sure that
Ellicott City
rises up to be an even stronger,
even more
vibrant place than it is right
now.
GWEN IFILL: Officials say the
damage will
run into the hundreds of
millions of dollars.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And from flood to
fire.
Cooler temperatures in central
California
today helped fire crews trying
to corral a
wildfire north of Big Sur.
It has scorched more than 60
square miles
since July 22, roughly the size
of San Francisco.
The fire has destroyed 57 homes
and still
threatens 2,000 more structures.
It is less than 20 percent
contained.
GWEN IFILL: The United States
launched multiple
airstrikes against the Islamic
State group
in Libya today.
At the request of Libya's
U.S.-backed government,
they targeted a tank and other
vehicles in
the coastal city of Sirte.
The strikes were the first by
the U.S. since
February.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Northern
Syria, a Russian
transport helicopter was shot
down, leaving
all five crew and officers on
board dead.
The MI-8 helicopter was shot
down in Idlib
province, where Russian
warplanes often target
Syrian rebels.
Moscow blamed a faction linked
to al-Qaida.
LT.
GEN.
SERGEI RUDSKOY, Russian Military
General Staff
(through translator): A
terrorist act was
committed today.
The helicopter was coming back
from a humanitarian
mission, after having delivered
food and medicine
to the Aleppo residents.
It was shot down from the ground
in the area
controlled by the militant group
Nusra Front
and the troops of moderate
opposition that
joined them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today,
rebels claimed
early progress in a new attempt
to break the
siege of Eastern Aleppo, but the
Syrian military
denied it.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, for the
first time, more than 60 groups
affiliated
with the Black Lives Matter
movement joined
today to offer criminal justice
and policing
reforms.
Among other things, the groups
are pushing
for an end to police use of
military-style
gear and vehicles.
They also urge decriminalizing
some offenses
for drugs, sex work and youth
crimes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yet another voter
I.D. law
has been struck down.
A federal judge ruled today that
North Dakota's
statute is an undue burden on
Native Americans.
It requires a driver's license
or other identify
cards issued by state or tribal
officials.
Similar laws in North Carolina
and Wisconsin
were struck down Friday.
GWEN IFILL: And on Wall Street,
the Dow Jones
industrial average lost 27
points to close
at 18404.
The Nasdaq rose 22 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
two Gold
Star parents respond to
criticism from Donald
Trump; on Politics Monday, a
look at the hypercharged
post-convention campaign; 50
years after a
Texas mass shooting that changed
campus security;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Democratic
Convention in
Philadelphia last week showcased
presidents
past, present and possibly
future.
But one man, standing next to
his wife, neither
of them before in the national
spotlight,
delivered a speech that's
reverberated across
American politics.
Lisa Desjardins wraps up today
on the campaign
trail.
LISA DESJARDINS: For Donald
Trump, today was
a day for a Rust Belt swing of
battleground
states.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
LISA DESJARDINS: Stopping this
afternoon in
Ohio, and later in Pennsylvania.
But on Twitter this morning, the
Republican
nominee stepped back into
days-old questioning
criticizing the Gold Star
parents of Army
Captain Humayun Khan, who died
in Iraq in
2004.
Trump said Khizr Khan, the
soldier's father
-- quote -- "viciously attacked
me from the
stage of the Democratic National
Convention,
and is now all over TV doing the
same."
That convention speech last
Thursday made
headlines.
KHIZR KHAN, Father of Killed
U.S. Soldier:
Have you ever been to Arlington
Cemetery?
Go look at the graves of brave
patriots who
died defending the United States
of America.
You have sacrificed nothing and
no one.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump first
pushed back in
an ABC News interview that aired
Sunday.
DONALD TRUMP: I think I have
made a lot of
sacrifices.
I have worked very, very hard.
I have created thousands and
thousands of
jobs, tens of thousands of jobs,
built great
structures.
LISA DESJARDINS: Reaction has
been swift from
both political parties, from
President Obama
speaking to disabled veterans in
Atlanta today.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
No one has given more to our
freedom than
our Gold Star families.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: Michelle and I
have spent countless
hours with them.
We have grieved with them.
LISA DESJARDINS: To Senate
Republicans mired
in reelection fights.
Arizona's John McCain said in a
statement
that Trump's nomination doesn't
give him -- quote
-- "unfettered license to defame
those who
are the best among us."
Senator Kelly Ayotte of New
Hampshire wrote:
"I am appalled that Donald Trump
would disparage
the Khan family."
And there were more.
Missouri's Roy Blunt, Ohio's Rob
Portman,
Pennsylvania's Pat Toomey, and
Wisconsin's
Ron Johnson all today separated
themselves
from Trump.
And, notably, a group usually
far outside
politics, the Veterans of
Foreign wars, or
VFW, also weighed in, with a
statement saying:
"To ridicule a Gold Star mother
is out-of-bounds."
His Democratic counterpart,
Hillary Clinton,
is in Nebraska today, but spoke
about all
this yesterday during her own
Rust Belt tour.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
To launch an attack, as he did,
on Captain
Khan's mother, a Gold Star
mother, I don't
know where the bounds are.
I don't know where the bottom
is.
LISA DESJARDINS: Team Trump,
though, has a
different take.
Trump's V.P. nominee, Indiana
Governor Mike
Pence, said in his own statement
that the
Khan family should be cherished
by every American.
But Pence went on to attack
President Obama
and Hillary Clinton, whom he
blames for the
rise of ISIS and threat to the
American military.
Trump campaign chairman Paul
Manafort also
hit that theme on Sunday's "Face
the Nation."
PAUL MANAFORT, Trump Campaign
Manager: The
issue is not Mr. Khan and Donald
Trump.
The issue really is radical
jihad -- radical
Islamic Jihad and the risk to
the American
homeland.
That's the issue.
LISA DESJARDINS: Even as the
controversy continues,
Trump is scheduled to press on
with his swing
state tour, with stops in
Virginia and Florida
in coming days.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with me now
are Khizr and
Ghazala Khan.
Thank you very much, both of
you, for being
here.
And condolences to both of you
on the loss
of your son.
GHAZALA KHAN, Mother of Killed
U.S. Soldier:
Thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Your lives have
changed since
Thursday night, haven't they?
KHIZR KHAN: Yes, certainly, for
the better.
The love and support has just
lessened our
burdens so very much from all
directions,
from all levels.
There has been just pouring of
affection,
pouring of condolences and
support.
It has just been amazing to all
over again
see the goodness of this
society, goodness
of this country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump
tweeted this morning
-- quote -- "Mr. Khan, who
doesn't know me,
viciously attacked me from the
stage of the
DNC, and is now all over TV
doing the same.
Nice."
He does seem irritated by your
talking to
the news media.
What do you say to him about
that?
KHIZR KHAN: We are in the
political process
of the greatest democracy on the
planet Earth.
He is candidate for the highest
office of
this nation.
He has to have the patience and
tolerance
for criticism.
Him and I have same equal
rights.
In his eyes, he thinks that he
can criticize
people, but no one else can
criticize.
That is not the value of this
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mrs. Khan, Donald
Trump and
his advisers are saying that
what this is
really is about is about radical
Islamic terrorism,
and he says that's what
everybody should be
talking about.
GHAZALA KHAN: I think he doesn't
know the
Islam.
I actually don't want to talk
about him or
if -- in my eyes, the people who
know Islam,
they won't say these things.
Islam is a peaceful religion,
and I'm really
proud of my religion.
So, I still don't understand why
he's so upset
about this that I didn't say
anything at that
time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're
referring to his
comment about the fact that you
didn't speak
at the convention, but you have
been speaking
since.
GHAZALA KHAN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what do you
make of his
really constant connection
between Islam the
faith and what he calls radical
Islamic terrorism?
He connects the two directly.
GHAZALA KHAN: I don't think he
should do that,
but it is his beliefs.
He can do -- I can take
criticism from him.
I can take it, but I believe
that he shouldn't
do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Khan, what
about that?
Because Donald Trump has quoted
a poll last
year that he said showed that
more than 50
percent of American Muslims
believe that there
should be Sharia law, which
advocates violent
acts against women and acts --
violent, in
effect, terrorism?
KHIZR KHAN: Sharia law cannot be
implemented
in this United States, because
this distorted
Sharia law is against the basic
principle
of equal dignity, equal
protection of law
in the United States.
What are we talking about?
These are political statements
to gather votes
and create hatred and dislike.
I would love to sit down and
talk on, what
Sharia law are we talking about?
There is no such thing.
These are laws of these
countries.
These are hodgepodge of various
traditions,
various British laws, various
colonized times,
laws, legal system.
There is no such thing.
The United States has the
Islamic law, which
is equal protection of law under
the 14th
Amendment.
Therefore, there is no fear,
except fear-mongers
make it fear.
Unless we amend our Constitution
and we take
out the Equal Protection Clause
of the 14th
Amendment, sure, we can talk
about Sharia
law coming in and sneaking in
here and all
that.
Otherwise, there is no place for
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mrs. Khan, Donald
Trump on
his Web site refers to what he
said in the
past, that all Muslims should be
banned for
a time from coming to this
country.
He now says all Muslims coming
from countries
where there is violent, as he
puts it, Islamic
terrorism should be subject to
additional
scrutiny, additional background
checks.
Do you think that's fair?
Does that make sense?
GHAZALA KHAN: I believe that we
should be
-- really, our security should
be really tight
to let them in.
But I shouldn't -- I do not
believe that they
should be banned, because there
are lots of
innocent people in these
countries.
They want to come out for their
children's
life, for their life, so we
shouldn't ban
anything without looking into
it, because
there are lots of people who
want to come
out of those countries, and they
are innocent.
They don't have to do anything
with terrorism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Khan, what
about that?
KHIZR KHAN: Of course we agree
that there
should be the strictest
standards to scrutinize,
make sure we only allow good
people, we don't
allow bad people.
But then what?
Last few incidences have
indicated that these
are homegrown, bad people.
How do you deal with that?
How would you scrutinize through
immigration?
They're here.
They're born here.
Therefore, to deal with it is
join hand with
the community, make it known
that the community
is part of the society.
The community has an obligation
to monitor
themselves while they are in
this community.
Terrorism, manners of terrorism
cannot be
defeated by army, by military
action.
If it was possible, this would
have already
taken place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two other quick
things.
Mrs. Khan, many Americans say
more American
Muslims need to speak out
against terrorism.
GHAZALA KHAN: True.
I believe that.
We should all get together and
speak that
terrorism is not the answer.
You always get respect and love
when you love
someone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally, Mr.
Khan, some
of Donald Trump's supporters are
saying you
and Mrs. Khan were tricked into
doing this
by the Clinton campaign.
GHAZALA KHAN: Not at all.
We were not tricked.
We were given an option.
She is my editor of the speech
that was about
six pages' long.
She kept editing and editing.
Don't say this.
I rely on her strength and on
her support
and guidance, so that speech
became three-minutes-long
speech.
And the Constitution came into
play.
I carry this in my pocket out of
affection
for this document.
At home, we have a stack of it
sitting.
Any time a guest comes, we give
them a copy
of it.
Amazon says that they have not
sold that many
Constitutions ever.
These are good civic lessons.
Anybody that picks up the
Constitution, reads
it begins to realize the
wonderful values
that exist and begins to see the
goodness
of this country.
And the same thing is on
registration of vote.
We -- it's a sacred right that
true democracy
gives us.
Lots of us don't use it, but if
somehow we
were able to encourage, I think
it was worth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Khizr Khan,
Mrs. Ghazala
Khan, thank you very much for
being here.
Our deepest condolences on the
loss of your
son.
KHIZR KHAN: Thank you for
inviting us.
GHAZALA KHAN: Thank you.
KHIZR KHAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
KHIZR KHAN: And we are glad to
be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the Trump
campaign didn't
respond to repeated requests to
provide a
spokesperson for an interview
today.
GWEN IFILL: For more on the
fight between
Donald Trump and the Khan
family, his recent
comments on Russia's
intervention in Ukraine,
and Hillary Clinton's weekend
outreach to
Rust Belt voters, it's time for
Politics Monday
with Tamara Keith of NPR and Amy
Walter of
The Cook Political Report.
You just heard Ghazala Khan say
to Judy in
response to the questions about
Donald Trump's
feud, whatever it is, that, "I
can take it."
We have heard in the last few
moments Warren
Buffett on behalf of Hillary
Clinton say,
have you no decency, sir?
You have made no sacrifice.
We heard John McCain also scold,
but not withdraw
his endorsement today of Donald
Trump.
I wonder, starting with you,
Amy, whether
it's ever a good thing to have
to defend yourself
by tweet?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: No,
but at the same time, nothing
about this campaign
has seemed normal.
Right?
The traditional candidate
response to a speech
like Mr. Khan gave would be to
say, my condolences
for your loss.
Here is my differences of
opinion on the policy
of it, right?
I differed with Hillary Clinton
and the Obama
administration on the war on
terror.
I differed with President Bush
on going to
Iraq in the very first place,
even though
he did say he supported it early
on, when
he invaded Iraq.
But that is the answer that a
traditional
politician would give.
And, Gwen, I just feel I should
just come
out here with a tape recorder
and just every
week say, nothing that he does
is like a traditional
politician would ever do.
What we are seeing is, his
supporters, I think,
will continue to rally around
him, but every
day that this campaign is about
Donald Trump
and his messaging, which is not
-- which is
about him and not about the
bigger, broader
issues, I don't think that's a
good day for
Donald Trump.
GWEN IFILL: Let's flip the
script a little
bit.
Hillary Clinton, it seems to me,
was asked
about Pat Smith, the Benghazi
mom, who spoke
at the Republican Convention,
and what was
her reaction?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Her reaction
was more the typical politician
answer.
It was, thank you for your
family's service.
I can't begin to understand your
loss, that
kind of thing.
And then she did get to the
question of whether
she remembered it the same way.
But she remained respectful
throughout, and
you wouldn't call it a feud.
That's the difference is, in the
way Hillary
Clinton answered, it ended
there.
And look at George W. Bush.
Cindy Sheehan was parked outside
his ranch
for a very long time protesting
him, and George
W. Bush...
GWEN IFILL: In 2008.
TAMARA KEITH: Was it -- it was
earlier.
I think it was even maybe 2004.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
AMY WALTER: Right.
Right.
TAMARA KEITH: And George W. Bush
said, that
is her right, that is her right
to protest,
that is her right to say
anything she wants
about me, because this is
America, actually.
GWEN IFILL: That's what America
actually allows
for.
Let's move on to something else
Donald Trump
had to say this weekend.
He was asked on "This Week" by
George Stephanopoulos
about his views about Ukraine
and Russia and
his relationship with Vladimir
Putin, and
this was his response.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
He is not going to go into
Ukraine, all right?
You can mark it down, you can
put it down,
you can take it any way you
want.
GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, ABC News:
He is already
there, isn't he?
DONALD TRUMP: Well, he is there
in a certain
way, but I'm not there.
You have Obama there.
And, frankly, that whole part of
the world
is a mess under Obama.
With all the strength that
you're talking
about and all of the power of
NATO and all
of this, in the meantime, he's
going away
-- he takes Crimea.
He's sort of...
GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS: But you
said you might
recognize that.
DONALD TRUMP: I'm going to take
a look at
it.
But, you know, the people of
Crimea, from
what I have heard, would rather
be with Russia
than where they were.
GWEN IFILL: He said two things
there that
horrified foreign policy
experts.
One was that, in fact, Russia
wasn't already
in Ukraine, which Ukrainians
would -- the
government we back in Ukraine
disagrees with,
and also that somehow Crimeans
think it would
be OK for Russia to stay there
after having
been annexed.
And then he came out today and
said, that's
not what I meant.
AMY WALTER: That's not what I
meant at all,
right.
So, he tweeted back out, that's
not what I
meant at al.
What I meant is, when I'm
president, they
won't do anymore in Ukraine.
But it's the Obama
administration that failed
in this.
Again, this is where he makes
Hillary Clinton's
job that much easier.
Her entire focus -- you saw it
at the DNC
-- you are going to see every
day for the
next 99 days -- is to say that
he's temperamentally
unfit to be president of the
United States,
he's dangerous.
And it's not just going to be
one thing or
another thing.
It's that this -- if this
happens day in and
day out, this idea about his
sympathies, whether
it's his sympathies to Putin,
whether it's
his fight that he's getting in
with the Khan
family, in the minds of people
who are not
already in a camp, polarized one
way or the
other, it sows enough doubt.
GWEN IFILL: But, on the other
hand -- always
throws the on the other hand,
Tam, which is,
people are not going to decide
who to vote
for based on whether they think
that, or are
they, that Donald Trump is great
friends with
Vladimir Putin?
TAMARA KEITH: I think that the
economy is
far more of a factor for
American voters than
what happens in Crimea.
The sector of voters that are
Crimea voters
is probably not very large.
So, going back to the Khan
family and the
feud with the Khan family, the
question is
whether this is the thing that
pushes Donald
Trump over the edge, whether
this is the time.
GWEN IFILL: We have said that
before.
TAMARA KEITH: And we have asked
that many
times, like with John McCain and
various other
things.
This seems more like the time
that he mocked
a disabled reporter than other
-- because
these are regular people.
These are civilians.
These aren't politicians that
he's going after.
And we won't know for a while,
but focus groups
showed that mocking a disabled
reporter was
the most resonant thing.
It's the thing that...
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: ... and why it's
in an ads.
And I just think that you're
going to see
this in an ad.
GWEN IFILL: We saw both of them
in the Rust
Belt, Ohio, Pennsylvania, in the
last few
days.
You were on the big bus tour,
which must have
been...
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: Exhausting.
GWEN IFILL: Exhausting, yes.
But I wonder what the candidates
are doing
now right out of their
conventions, starting
off on the general election,
what this tells
us about how they were received
at the conventions
and what they are trying to do
next, Amy.
AMY WALTER: Well, to build on
Tam's point
about the economy, this is
another missed
opportunity here for the Trump
campaign.
On Friday, the news came out,
GDP numbers
terrible, were at like the
second worst recovery
since 1949.
You're supposed to go to the
Rust Belt and
make that case.
See, the economy is not doing
well under Obama,
why would you let Hillary
Clinton do it?
Of course, that's not what we
were talking
about this weekend.
We were talking all of these
things.
What Hillary Clinton was doing
this weekend
-- Tam was on the bus and
actually saw this,
but if you look at the cities
that she went,
she went right into Trump
country.
And that's not because she
thinks she's going
to win there, but campaigns are
as much as
about winning over voters as it
is not losing
by a lot.
And she's trying to narrow the
margins.
In those areas that Obama lost,
she can't
lose by as worst percentage.
GWEN IFILL: And I know it's too
soon to talk
about convention bumps, even
though there
are a handful of polls out today
showing that
she has some kind of a bump.
But how is this campaign then
positioning
itself to take advantage of
whatever positivity
they can get out of this
negativity for their
opponent?
TAMARA KEITH: They're trying to
hold their
ground.
No matter what the bump says, I
get the feeling
that Hillary Clinton and the
Clinton campaign
is just going to keep plugging
away.
This is not a flashy campaign.
This is the nitty-gritty work.
I mean, they're in Omaha, where
there is one
electoral vote that she could
possibly maybe
win.
GWEN IFILL: And that's Warren
Buffett's.
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: And that's where
Warren Buffett
happens to be, and that is where
he is introducing
her.
But they are doing the small
ball, trying
to win that way.
Meanwhile, Donald Trump is going
for the big
splash, and this is a real test.
GWEN IFILL: Of which will work.
TAMARA KEITH: Of which will
work.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Tamara Keith of NPR,
Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report,
thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
China facing
the biggest aging crisis the
world has ever
seen; plus, what and who to
watch for in this
year's Olympics.
GWEN IFILL: But, first: Texas
marks a somber
anniversary today, 50 years
after a shooting
massacre, then unprecedented,
shook the campus
of the state's flagship public
university.
But along with that anniversary,
the University
of Texas at Austin and the
state's other schools
marked another milestone today,
the enactment
of a new law that allows people
to carry concealed
guns on Texas campuses.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is the
clock tower
where horror rained down 50
years ago today.
Bells rang to remember the lives
lost, and
to honor the survivors of the
shooting at
the University of Texas in
Austin.
The flags on the campus mall
were lowered
to half-staff.
The clock tower was stopped for
24 hours.
Bagpipes led mourners to the
tower's garden,
where a new memorial was
dedicated to victims
of the horrific event.
It was on a hot August day in
1966 that former
Marine and engineering student
Charles Whitman
climbed to the top of the clock
tower and
opened fire.
Whitman killed 14 people on
campus that day,
and had also murdered his wife
and mother
before his shooting spree began.
More than 30 people were
wounded, and a 17th
victim died decades later of
wounds sustained
that day.
Whitman's rampage 50 years ago
lasted an hour-and-a-half,
and only ended after police
stormed the tower
and killed him.
Other students had also fired at
Whitman with
their own rifles.
Texas Congressman Lloyd Doggett
was a student
on campus that day.
REP.
LLOYD DOGGETT (D), Texas: This
massacre, we
need to remember, occurred
before terms like
gun violence, and mass shooting
or SWAT team
were even a part of our regular
vocabulary.
This campus attack was
unprecedented.
I think it was as unexpected for
us in the
university community and for our
police department
as if some flying saucer had
landed up there
on top of the tower.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As the
community gathered
to mark the anniversary of one
of the nation's
first campus mass shootings,
today also marked
the very first day that
concealed firearms
will be permitted inside
University of Texas
buildings.
Last year, state legislators
passed the so-called
campus carry law, arguing that
armed students
might be able to stop the next
mass shooting
from occurring.
To talk about the university's
commemoration,
as well as how it's grappling
with this new
concealed carry law, I'm joined
by Gregory
Fenves.
He is the president of the
University of Texas
at Austin.
He originally spoke out against
the concealed
weapon bill, but now that it's
law, he's implementing
it on campus.
President Fenves, welcome.
First off, let's talk about
today's memorial
and commemoration.
Why now?
What is it you're hoping to
accomplish with
this memorial?
GREGORY FENVES, President,
University of Texas
at Austin: Well, it's been 50
years since
the tragedy of the tower
shooting.
Many of the survivors are
getting on in age.
And as we were preparing for
this anniversary,
sad anniversary, of this tragic
event, we
realized we had not adequately
memorialized
those 17 individuals that were
killed on August
1, 1966.
And we wanted to do two things.
We first wanted to bring some
measure of healing
and closure to the survivors and
the many
law enforcement heroes that came
to the rescue
that day.
But we also wanted to heal the
campus.
I think the campus had not given
enough recognition
to this tragedy.
It is part of our history.
It is a sad part of our history.
So we wanted an appropriate
memorial that
would live on forever at the
University of
Texas to remember the events of
1966.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Why do you
think it has
taken 50 years to do this?
GREGORY FENVES: Well, in the
mid-1960s, this
was the first mass shooting,
sadly, the first
mass shooting at an American
campus.
We have, unfortunately, had more
of those
in the past 50 years.
I think the country and society
and individuals
felt the best way to cope with a
tragedy is
to move on, to not talk about
it.
We now know that that's not the
best way for
a community and for individuals
to deal with
tragedy and to try to learn from
it and try
to move on.
And so we wanted a public
commemoration that
would recognize the fallen and
thank the survivors
and thank the heroes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Today's
commemoration, as
you well know, also marks the
implementation
of this concealed carry law,
which supporters
say is a response to these types
of shootings,
that their belief is that, if we
have more
armed citizens in the population
and on college
campuses, that they will be
better able to
respond to these types of
massacres before
police can get there.
What do you make of that
argument?
GREGORY FENVES: Well, I don't
think there
is much evidence that that
actually does help.
But, nevertheless, it is the law
in the state
of Texas.
There's great opposition to it
on our campus
among faculty, students, among
parents of
students.
But we went through nearly a
year-long, very
thoughtful, very engaging
process with all
members of our community, to
develop policies
that promote campus safety, but
also follow
the law, which I, as president
of the university,
are obligated to implement.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Supporters of
this law point
to what happened 50 years ago,
which was,
when Whitman starts shooting
from that tower,
that some students got rifles,
were able to
pin him down somewhat until
police can get
there.
You don't believe that that is a
good argument
in support of this kind of a
law?
GREGORY FENVES: Well, I think
police tactics
and police training have
improved dramatically
since 1966.
There were no SWAT teams.
Police didn't have the weapons
they needed
to deal with the shooting.
And so, unfortunately, we have a
need for
very highly trained law
enforcement agencies
who train regularly, are very
rigorous in
dealing with these situations,
as is our University
of Texas Police Department and
local law enforcement
agencies.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, starting
this fall,
some slice of your population of
students
could be carrying concealed
weapons on campus.
Do you worry, as president of
the university,
that something could go wrong?
I mean, college kids drink.
They -- tempers can flare.
Do you worry about something
happening, some
kind of a mishap?
GREGORY FENVES: Well, I worry
every night
about what could happen.
That's my nature.
We have 50,000 students.
We're a campus community of
almost 70,000
individuals in a very dynamic,
urban area.
And so, as you have said, these
situations
can always develop, whether
there is a concealed
carry law or not.
In Texas, an individual licensed
to carry
has to be over age 21 -- many of
our students
are under age 21 -- has to
undergo a criminal
background check, has to go
through training.
And less than 5 percent of the
Texas population
has concealed permits to carry.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You mentioned
today that
this event happened back before
we even had
a language to talk about mass
shootings and
gun violence in this country.
Do you feel like the university
is prepared
for these types of events going
forward?
GREGORY FENVES: Well, you can
never truly
be prepared for a tragedy of
that magnitude.
But our police force, UTPD, in
collaboration
with the Austin Police
Department and the
state Department of Public
Safety, regularly
train for active -- what they
call active
shooter events.
Unfortunately, we had one a
couple of years
ago, and most people report the
police responded
almost instantaneously.
So, I have great confidence in
our law enforcement
agencies.
But one of the outgrowths of the
tower shooting
in 1966 was the understanding of
mental health
counseling.
And the university was very
proactive in that
period to add mental health
counselors to
assist with students coping with
tragedy.
And we have used that for a
number of different
incidents that have occurred
over the years.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
President Gregory
Fenves of the University of
Texas at Austin,
thank you very much.
GREGORY FENVES: Thank you very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Southeast
Asia, tensions
continue to simmer as China
claims sovereignty
over the South China Sea, a busy
international
trade route.
The United States and China have
both beefed
up their naval presence there,
leading to
fears of a military
confrontation.
This is just one example of
China flexing
its military muscle in recent
months, and
it coincides with a slowdown in
the nation's
economy.
Writing in "The Atlantic"
magazine, journalist
Howard French sees a connection
between the
two, pointing out that, as
China's population
ages, the country faces a huge
demographic
problem that will affect all
aspects of its
economic and military
aspirations.
HOWARD FRENCH, "The Atlantic":
China has its
own Baby Boom generation.
And China's baby boom
generation, because
of the size of China itself, is
the world's
largest baby boom generation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Howard French, a
former Shanghai
bureau chief for The New York
Times, has written
extensively about China, and
he's photographed
its people.
HOWARD FRENCH: This baby boom
generation in
China will start to hit
retirement age in
the very next few years, let's
say by the
end of this decade.
And, at that moment,
extraordinary numbers
of Chinese people will exit the
work force,
and the Chinese work force,
which has already
begun to shrink, will shrink in
a vastly accelerated
way.
And so China's going to face
huge retirement
costs and Social Security costs,
health care
costs, related to this immense
aging of the
population.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are the
implications for
China as a country and for the
Chinese economy?
HOWARD FRENCH: China will have
the biggest
aging crisis that the world has
ever seen
over the next generation, and
this happens
at a time when Chinese
ambitions, geopolitically
speaking, are expanding.
And at some point, these two
phenomena will
collide, and very tough
decisions will have
to be made about guns vs. canes.
In other words, how much can we
afford to
invest in our geopolitical
ambitions, vs.
how much must we invest in terms
of supporting
our population?
JUDY WOODRUFF: The massive
number of baby
boomers wouldn't be such a
problem if China's
younger generations were just as
large.
But they are not, mainly because
of the one-child
policy China imposed on all
families beginning
in 1978.
HOWARD FRENCH: The one-child
policy was based
on some faulty science and had,
as an ambition,
reining in Chinese population
growth, so as
to enhance the per capita wealth
of the country.
Because the Chinese made a
straight-line prediction
based on what the present
fertility rate was
in the late 1970s, they made
some big errors
in their projections.
Imposing the one-child policy
meant that the
fertility rate took additional
hits.
And the penalties of this
decision are just
now being borne.
This is a mistake of
extraordinary significance
for China's place in the world,
for Chinese
power, for Chinese prosperity.
And for the Chinese Communist
Party to turn
around all of a sudden and say,
hey, wait
a minute, that big one-child
policy thing
was a huge mistake is very
difficult for them
to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you believe,
today, the
Chinese leadership understands
what's happened
and are trying to do something
about it; they
just don't want to be so public
with their
acknowledgement?
HOWARD FRENCH: They have been
very grudgingly,
very gradually coming --
publicly coming to
terms with what people have
known for quite
some time was a big issue.
And this came to a head in the
last year,
when Beijing decided to relax
the one-child
policy officially.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You, of course,
were a New
York Times bureau chief in
Shanghai.
You have lived in China.
You know the country very well.
What is that going to mean, in
terms of the
old China, the evolving China?
HOWARD FRENCH: Well, when you
arrive in China
nowadays, one of the first
things you note
is the emphasis placed on you, a
non-Chinese
person, being an outsider.
Sometimes, this is done
aggressively.
Sometimes, this is done rudely,
but most of
the time it's just done
routinely.
It's just a normal thing in the
course of
your encounters with Chinese
people in every
walk of life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Were you able to
capture that
in your photographs, do you
think, the in
and out?
HOWARD FRENCH: Sure.
As I set out to begin
photographing Shanghai,
I encountered this
insider/outsider phenomena
in the most personal of ways.
You would walk into an old
neighborhood in
the center of city, and people
would begin
to point at you.
People would begin to talk about
you, spreading
the word about the outsider who
has wandered
into their midst, look at him,
he's got a
camera, what's he doing, is this
allowed,
is this OK, how should be
respond to him,
et cetera, et cetera.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what were you
trying to
capture?
HOWARD FRENCH: Well, I was
trying to capture
a way of living in the city that
was under
immense pressure, that was being
radically
transformed right before my
eyes.
These neighborhoods were filled
in a hugely
disproportionate way with
relatively old people,
people who the Chinese back then
already were
speaking of as a lost
generation, people who,
during the cultural revolution,
had not gone
to college because Chinese
schools were closed,
and who had often been sent to
the countryside
as a way of political training.
And then, so when China opens up
at the end
of the 1970s and begins to
reform its economy
and to become quasi-capitalist,
these people,
just by virtue of their own
timing in the
last century of their coming of
age, they
were not, most of them, eligible
for these
new competitive jobs that
capitalism was providing
to China.
And so those were the
left-behind people in
those neighborhoods.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what does
that mean the
options are for the Chinese
government and
for the Chinese people?
How do they reach some sort of
equilibrium
in terms of having enough people
to fill the
jobs to keep the engine of their
economy going?
HOWARD FRENCH: China, the
world's most populous
country, 1.3, 1.4 billion
people, will in
the next decade or so have to
begin looking
for people outside of China.
What does this mean?
China will have to become a much
more welcoming
society.
It means that China will have to
attract immigrants
from other countries in order to
slow the
aging of the population.
The problem is, if you're 1.3
billion, 1.4
billion people, where do you
find enough immigrants
in order to have a significant
impact on a
population of that size?
There's no obvious candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: China's need for
immigrants
stands in stark contrast to the
situation
in the United States, which
French finds ironic,
in light of the current
political debate in
the U.S.
HOWARD FRENCH: The reason the
United States
is not aging rapidly in terms of
its demographics
is because we accept people as
newcomers to
this society in numbers that far
surpass any
of our major peers or rivals.
And this is what replenishes the
work force.
It reinvigorates the society.
It underpins our tax base.
And so it is this immigration
that, in a way,
that has been largely
unappreciated in our
political debate, which really
is a kind of
churn of our economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Until China finds
a similar
churn for its economy,
immigration, increased
fertility or something else,
French says its
leaders are faced with some
bleak decisions,
starting with scaling back the
military.
HOWARD FRENCH: Since the first
Gulf War in
1991, the Chinese have been
increasing their
military budget roughly by 11
percent a year
on average.
There's no way that China will
be able to
sustain that sort of military
expenditure.
And then the most important
reason is because
of its population changes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that, says
French, may
well mean Chinese leaders are
eager to make
aggressive military moves now,
while they
still can.
HOWARD FRENCH: This is the
moment to go for
the ring, if you will, to try to
secure every
gain that you can, before the
huge costs come
home.
And, therefore, we're seeing
China push very
hard in its immediate
neighborhood, particularly
in the maritime zone surrounding
China, to
kind of create a security zone
for itself,
trying to lock in the
territorial and maritime
gains that it can now, before a
period of
much more difficult choices
arises some time
in the 2020s.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can read
Howard French's
full article online at our
partner, "The Atlantic"'s
Web site.
That's TheAtlantic.com.
GWEN IFILL: Four days out from
the Olympic
Opening Ceremonies in Rio de
Janeiro, it's
not a pretty picture.
There are warnings about the
risk of contaminated
waterways, and the dispute
continues between
anti-doping officials and the
chief of the
International Olympic Committee
over Russia's
participation.
That said, there's excitement
around the actual
competition.
Jeffrey Brown got a preview of
U.S. medal
hopes with Christine Brennan,
sportswriter
and columnist for USA Today and
ABC News.
JEFFREY BROWN: Christine
Brennan, welcome
back.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN, USA Today:
Thanks, Jeff.
Great to be here.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, there's a
certain point
we talk about all the problems,
but a certain
point, let the games begin,
right?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Exactly.
It's time.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, let's talk
about athletics
here.
Often, Summer Olympics,
Americans, and we
have talk over the years about
especially
gymnastics, swimming and other
things.
Start with gymnastics, another
big year coming.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Oh,
absolutely.
In fact, it may be the biggest
year ever for
USA gymnastics, especially the
women's side,
Jeff, which is saying something,
because U.S.
women have become the dominant
gymnasts in
the world, going back to the
days of Mary
Lou Retton, Shannon Miller,
obviously Gabby
Douglas.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just last time.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Right.
Exactly.
And she's back.
She did make it and will be a
steadying influence,
I think, and helpful to the next
big names.
So, in this list of names I just
mentioned,
there is another one coming,
maybe the best
of all, Simone Biles.
She has won everything.
JEFFREY BROWN: Maybe the best --
she is coming
in already talked about as one
of the best
ever.
Right?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Exactly.
And, in fact, she's so good that
everyone
just is basically handing her
the gold medal
for the individual all-around.
Team gold medal should be the
United States',
no problem.
And then...
JEFFREY BROWN: So, no pressure
at all, right?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, and
that's the point,
though.
It's a great point.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: She did
stumble at the
Olympic trials.
Everything was set.
She was going to make the team.
And she had a couple
uncharacteristic bobbles
and a fall.
And, as you know, from watching
sports, as
everyone at home knows, just
when you think
you know it's solid and it's
guaranteed, is
there going to be a crack here?
I think she is so good and so
strong, and
because she's won world title
after world
title, the top gymnast in the
world the last
three or four years, I would be
stunned if
Simone Biles has a misstep.
But that's a tall order.
And it's also over a
week-and-a-half basically
of events, and we will see how
she handles
that pressure.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
Swimming, return of two big
stars, right?
Michael Phelps, to my amazement,
I read it's
his fifth Olympics coming back.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Right.
Yes, he was a 15-year-old in
2000 -- most
people forget that -- in Sydney.
He's now 31 years old.
He's a dad, and he says he has
cleaned up
his act.
He's had issues of course with
drunk driving
and other things.
This is it.
It's his last gasp.
JEFFREY BROWN: He says this is
really it.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: This is
really it, as opposed
to the other time when he was
retiring the
last time.
But Phelps is still at one --
certainly the
best in the United States at
what he does,
the 100 butterfly, 200
butterfly.
Whether -- the key question,
Jeff, is whether
he's the best in the world.
And his times in Omaha at the
Olympic swimming
trials a month or so ago were
not the best
in the world.
They were not his best.
So, the question is, for Michael
Phelps, can
he get better, can he get
faster?
Otherwise, while we just expect
him to win
everything, it might be a little
bit of a
surprise.
Maybe he will win the 100 fly,
which is an
incredible achievement, 200 fly.
But the reality is, there is a
lot of competition
from around the world, and these
guys would
love to beat Michael Phelps.
JEFFREY BROWN: And on the
women's side, Katie
Ledecky.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Oh, Katie
Ledecky is gold.
Now, that's -- I think if you
said to me,
what would be the most
surprising to happen
at the Olympics in terms of a
U.S. athlete,
it would be Katie Ledecky not
winning.
JEFFREY BROWN: Really?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: She should be
five seconds,
six seconds ahead in the 400, 11
seconds ahead
in the 800 freestyle.
She has also got the 200 free.
And then she would have the
4x200 relay.
So, if everything goes well for
Katie Ledecky,
it would be four gold medals,
the most for
any American, I'm sure, at these
Games in
terms of swimming, and she will
really come
out of the Olympics -- if all
that happens,
she will come out of the
Olympics as the swimming
star of the Games for the U.S.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
So, if we look -- now I want to
switch to
track and field.
And there the doping scandal has
an impact.
But start first with Usain Bolt.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Yes.
He is back, right.
He is trying to do a triple
double.
JEFFREY BROWN: A triple double,
yes.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: We hear that
all the time
in basketball.
Here's the triple double in
track and field,
Jeff.
It's winning the men's 100 and
the men's 200
in three consecutive Olympics.
Beijing, he did it.
People remember how he finishes
the race,
by turning around and jumping up
and down,
and looking at his competitors,
and dancing
while he's still running, and
has these incredible
times, and then he did it again
in London.
So, here he is.
He will be 30 years old on the
day the Games
end.
That's not exactly a spring
chicken.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Has had some
injuries.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: And he had a
hamstring
pull just a few weeks ago.
He says he's healthy.
We will see.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, the Russian
doping scandal,
we know has an impact already in
the track
and field, right?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: We do.
Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what impact
would it have?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, I think
it's a big
one.
Here's the reality.
The Russian track and field team
is banned,
except for one lone long jumper.
So, the fact that they were
second in the
medal count in London, Jeff, in
track and
field, they had won seven gold
and they won
16 medals overall.
And those medals now are gone.
They are just not going to be
able to win
them.
So, while I personally believe
Russia should
have been banned completely, the
entire team,
for state-sponsored,
government-sponsored
systemic doping, the likes of
which we have
not seen since East Germany 40,
50 years ago,
the reality is Russia is in the
Games.
But track and field is where the
federation
said, no, we're not going to
allow this cheating
system, this incredible,
diabolical system
to get into our sports.
So, the track and field
federation kicked
out the Russians.
And that's where you will see, I
think, a
significant impact in terms of
the lack of
Russian medals, obviously.
And the U.S. and other countries
will benefit
from that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Speaking of
medals, right,
let's look at just some big
picture here in
our last minute.
More women competing and medal
count, give
me a look at the big picture
when you watch
these Games.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Right.
Jeff, we called the 2012 U.S.
team Team Title
IX.
Well, we can call this team, the
2016 team,
Team Title IX as well, the most
women ever
by any country being sent to the
Olympics.
The U.S. is sending 292 women
out of a team
of 555.
That is all about watching that
law, Title
IX, signed in 1972 by Richard
Nixon, work
its way through our culture.
And the power of U.S. women will
be extraordinary,
team sports, dominating
basketball, maybe
soccer, water polo, others, the
rowing.
And then as far as medal
count...
JEFFREY BROWN: The basketball
team hasn't
-- you were telling me before,
right, hasn't
lost since...
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: The women's
basketball
team hasn't lost since 1992.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Yes.
And one of the reasons people
don't know is
this is because they're so
dominant, that
the media tends to go, oh, give
them the gold
medal and move on to other
sports.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
They won again.
And women's soccer, of course,
will be a big
deal as well.
And then, as far as the medal
count, the U.S.
should do as it usually does at
the Summer
Games and dominate, especially
with Russia
being down, understandably so,
correctly.
I think the U.S. will do very
well.
China will be there.
It will be interesting to see if
Great Britain,
which had a great Games, home
Games, four
years ago, if they can keep that
up and continue
to win medals in sports where no
one expected
them to do that in 2012.
Can they keep it up now when
they go to Rio
in 2016?
JEFFREY BROWN: Christine
Brennan, enjoy yourself
down there.
(CROSSTALK)
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Thank you,
Jeff.
I will.
Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: A Syrian woman living
abroad was inspired
to help when the revolution
began.
Concerned for the women in her
country, she
has helped organize literacy
classes, create
women's centers and more.
Learn how her organization
strives to give
women a safe place, on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.